<tt>COMBAT<br>
COMBAT AGGRESSIVE<br>
COMBAT NOT<br>
COMBAT REAR<br>
COMBAT DEFENSIVE<br>
COMBAT FLEE<br>
COMBAT HELP [NOT]</tt>

This order determines a unit's behaviour in combat.

<tt>COMBAT AGGRESSIVE</tt>: In combat, the unit will take the front and it will fight to the death. This is a reasonable setting for cannon fodder.

<tt>COMBAT</tt>: In combat, the unit will take the front row. It will try to flee from the battle field when it is severely wounded (less than 20% of its hit points left). It's a good idea to set this for 'valuable' front row fighters like well-trained swordsmen.

<tt>COMBAT REAR</tt>: The unit will take a second row position in combat. It will try to flee from the battle field when it is severely wounded (less than 20% of its hit points left). After the front row is shattered, the units of the second row engage in close combat. You might want to give this order to your bowmen.

<tt>COMBAT DEFENSIVE</tt>: This status is identical to COMBAT REAR except the unit tries to flee after it is slightly wounded (less than 90% of its hit points left). A sensible order for magicians.

<tt>COMBAT NOT</tt>: The unit takes part in combat only if it is directly attacked by an enemy unit. The unit tries to flee from the battle field as soon as it gets slightly wounded (less than 90% of its hit points left). This would be a reasonable status for craftsmen and units with advanced stealth skills.

<tt>COMBAT FLEE</tt>: Units given this order try to escape from battle field when they would be drawn into combat. For every unit the basic chance of a successful flight is 25% (Halflings: 50%). Another 10% are added for a horse and 5% for each level of the unit's stealth skill. Yet, the best possible chance of escape is 75% (Halflings: 90%).

<tt>COMBAT HELP</tt>: The COMBAT HELP NOT order prevents a fighting unit from involving other units (of your own or allied factions) in the combat. If a unit with this combat status is attacked, no other allied unit participates in the combat - as long as no other unit without this combat status gets attacked. Also see the HELP order.

Note that you can set only one of the COMBAT, COMBAT AGGRESSIVE, REAR, DEFENSIVE, NOT, or FLEE status but at the same time set COMBAT HELP or COMBAT HELP NOT for a unit.

For more details, also see the chapters on [[The Art of War|combat]] and [[Alliances|alliances]].


[[Category:Orders]]