To register for the game, go to [http://www.eressea.de/en/register.html http://www.eressea.de/en/register.html] and fill in the form. After registration, you will receive an email that you must reply to in order to verify your registered email address. When that is done, '''just wait until your next turn, where you will receive your first report'''.

New factions are placed in virgin areas of the world, with only players of the same age around them. Some players think it's a good idea to spend the first few weeks registering over and over again until they get a seemingly good position. It's not. It makes it impossible for the GM's to create an adequate population density if too many factions drop out, and it creates holes that are hard to fill. Don't let yourself be fooled by first appearances: The starting positions are not chosen by an unintelligent algorithm, but by someone with five years experience. If your first region looks poor, chances are, there are plenty of resources around you, or a good combination of other races that will help you in the long run. If the region looks too good to be true, it sometimes isn't.

In order to help the GM's fill the gaps that early dropouts create, they have added the option of starting in an already populated area. Select this option on the registration form, and you will be placed among factions that are up to 20 weeks old. You will of receive much better starting equipment, and usually you will be placed among people who need someone just like you.