<tt>GUARD [NOT]</tt>

Units can guard regions if they are armed and have the appropriate weapon skill. To guard a region prevents non-allied units from collecting taxes, gathering resources and recruiting peasants in that region (from the following turn on) and non-allied units trying to travel through the region will be stopped with a certain probability. There is one exception to this: if your STEALTH exceeds the PERCEPTION of the guarding faction you can collect taxes, recruit new peasants or produce raw materials.

Your units on ships cannot [[WORK]] or [[ENTERTAIN]] in a guarded region (except the guarding faction has set [[HELP|HELP GUARD]] status for your faction).

The <tt>GUARD</tt> order becomes effective only one turn after being issued because the guards have to find out where non-allied units earn money before they can prevent them from doing so. If a guard moves to another region, or is given the order <tt>GUARD NOT</tt>, it quits its guarding duties.

A guarding unit will be visible to all units in the same region, no matter well-trained it is in stealth. This gives all other units one turn to react to the new situation. A guarding unit can also [[SIEGE|besiege]] a castle in that region.

More than one faction can guard a region simultaneously. In that case, only factions [[Alliances|allied]] to all guarding factions can collect taxes, recruit new peasants or produce raw materials in this region.

Note: Monsters (faction 0) are always regarded as being armed even if they do not carry visible weapons.

[[Category:Orders]]