::''Draiochean bhean'Gwynewa carefully crept nearer the clearing, when the crack of branches behind her caused her to stop in fright. Nevertheless, it couldn't be her mother, Gwynewa? The old cat could become terribly furious if she caught one of her daughters doing something she had strictly forbidden previously, and entering the elven forest she had strictly forbidden to her. Which naturally did not prevent Draiochean from doing it. 'When could a cat ever be forbidden something!' proudly thought the still young cat.''

::''The cause of the cracking stood guiltily, and moved before her. It was Llyfr'yn Darllenydd, ones of the sons of the charcoal burner Grym ng'Darllen. The inpudent fellow had already crept around her for some time. Draiochean decided to take the opportunity with a few of her claws, when she was blinded by a bright light that shone from the nearby clearing. She quickly ducked back into the thicket, and motioned for Llyfr to do likewise.''

::''In the clearning, the elves had assembled and formed a circle around an unnaturally blazing fire. Draiochean heard quiet singer, which souned to her ears like the rushing of the wind amongst the leaves of an ancient forest.''

::''The singing becamse louder, and the elves in the glade began to dance. Very slowly, very composed, and then a little bit faster. Suddenly the dancing stopped, and the singing fell silent. The magician called out arcane words to teh forest. Draiochean and Llyfr's hearts beat faster, and he timidly seized her hand, when something ancient and large picked them both up, and raised the two of them into the air...''