Eressea is a fantasy world. Elves, dwarves, orcs and other races live among its shores, dragons and sea serpents terrorize its population, and powerful magic is part of everyday life.

Eressea is a gigantic world. Thousands of little kingdoms and clans, mighty empires and trade unions are spread over numerous continents and islands. Most of them you may never meet in your life. But you will hear many legends of both victory and defeat, joy and tragedy from far-off places.

Eressea is a complex world. To be successful, there is much you must do and understand. You will forge alliances, establish trade routes, and build mighty fortresses. Sometimes your neighbors may just not like you and declare war. But if all goes well, your people can develop and expand for ages to come. At the beginning, playing Eressea takes well under an hour a week. But after several months or even years of playing, the leaders of large factions often need 10 hours for a turn, sometimes more.

There is no defined goal, no final victory in Eressea. Your goals in life are entirely up to you, whether you want to explore the world, build a trading fleet, conquer and expand, or simply socialize with other players.

Each player is the leader of one faction of people in Eressea, all of which belong to one (and only one) of the eleven available races. You can start playing at any time, even after the game has been going for years, and the first person of your new family will be set into a new piece of land, usually close to others as young as you. From then on, it's all up to you.

== Under Construction! ==

These are the English translated rules for Eressea. They are currently under development and the English version of the game is not yet finished. There may be discrepancies between these rules and the actual game. If you spot any, please let us know immediately.

In case there are any questions or helpful suggestions, please send an E-mail to [mailto:eressea-help@eressea.kn-bremen.de eressea-help@eressea.kn-bremen.de] or use [http://eressea.upb.de/mantis/ Mantis].