== Mustering of soldiers ==

Now the units arm themselves. Every person in every unit picks one melee and one missile weapon as well as a piece of armor they are able to use. Weapons are preferred in order of the sum of the attack and defense skill of the unit with this weapon. Magicians with a combat spell set use their spell. For defending they need a weapon (and the skill) otherwise they are unarmed.

'''Attention:''' unused weapons and armor are not given to units which are not armed.

During combat, weapons are not exchanged unless a person in the unit with a better set of weapon dies. The surviving fighters always use the best available sets of weapons.

Archers who find themselves moved to the front rows must use a melee weapon (and have an appropriate skill of at least one), or they will defend themselves like unarmed units.

== The tactician's ambush ==

At the beginning of the battle the faction with the best tactician gets an extra round to attack. A tactician, who fights in the front row, gets a +1 bonus to his tactics-skill. If he stands in the 3rd or 4th row his tactics skill will be reduced by 1. If both sides have equally skilled tacticians, both sides can attack.

Every tactician gets a bonus which starts at 0 and can get very high, although the probability of getting an extreme high bonus is relatively low.

== Heroes ==

Heroes are great fighters. To make a unit to heroes, use the [[PROMOTION]] command.

Unlike normal fighters heroes get 10 attacks per combat round.

Attention:That does not work for magical attacks, crossbows and catapults.

For more details check [[PROMOTION|here]].