There are five schools of magic in Eressea. Every faction can dedicate itself to only of them. On the first you want a unit to learn the magic skill you have to use the [[LEARN|LEARN Magic <school name>]] order. This will make the unit learn magic and set the magic school for your faction - from then on you cannot switch to a different school.

The following descriptions of the five schools of magic should give a rough idea of what kind of magic they represent. They are intentionally vague to leave room for interpretation and imagination on behalf of the players.

== Illaun ==

::''"[...] and only, if we sink into the world of dreams, will we catch a glipse into these other dimensions. Dimensions of light and darkness, paradise, and great vastness. Views of the past, present, and future. But not only of our own world, but into a myriad of other worlds, which exist in our spirit and elsewhere. The boundaries blur [...]"''

Fragment from the book of the times, written by Althochelfisch, age unknown, origin unknown, the whereabouts of the original unknown. No copies are known to exist, translation of the fragment by Rehlan Staubnix, librarian of the department of esoteric writings, Academy of Xontormia.

== Tybied ==

::''"Now, hmm, my young elf, you have recieved in the last half year one introduction of the practical magic. Fireballs, illusions, teleportation... and now, hmm, it is on me, to dispel your nonsense once again. Thankless, I say to you."''

::''"Let me explain to you, hmm, what magic is real. Surely someone told you the fact that it concerns the manipulation of energy, and, hmm, so the subject goes. It's all foolishness! You must learn, from examples you can comprehend, from those, hmm, you will learn magic exists. Its, hmm, internal structure, its sources, hmm, its strength. Only then, hmm, will it become all yours, such grandness as it is. Then you will know, manipulate it as one, its Threads and Patterns changed, hmm, and at your discretion reassembled. Which then, hmm, I must admit, in that, hmm, practice can be quite useful."''

From a lecture for a beginning student, by Feoral Birnkern, lecturer in theoritical magic, academy of Thal

== Cerddor ==

In a small tavern in Eryn'yn'Falathvorn, Sud-Andune:

::''Niolamel regarded the singer in fascination. The young elf could feel, see the strength which proceeded from his formal voice. She briefly regarded the remaining listeners. At the table beside her, sat the burly mountain elf from Dunfanaghy-Massiv. What had caused the heavily armed and prepared elf to strike so far south as he had? Quite peacefully sat the elf, one who belonged to such a wild and barbarishly ill-reputed clan, where he listend to the to the voice of the singer.''

::''An old man continued to sit at a table, one human in the uniform tunic of the 13th Legion. He did not look attractive, age had left clear marks over him. His right arm was broken, an obvious war crime. His right face was half covered in a deep scar, the blow from a war axe, Niolamel assumed. He too seemed to be taken prisoner by the voice of the singer, and for one moment, it appeared to the elf, as if the scar on the face of the old man would fade, and new life would pulsate in his grey skin.''

== Gwyrrd ==

::''Draiochean bhean'Gwynewa carefully crept nearer the clearing, when the crack of branches behind her caused her to stop in fright. Nevertheless, it couldn't be her mother, Gwynewa? The old cat could become terribly furious if she caught one of her daughters doing something she had strictly forbidden previously, and entering the elven forest she had strictly forbidden to her. Which naturally did not prevent Draiochean from doing it. 'When could a cat ever be forbidden something!' proudly thought the still young cat.''

::''The cause of the cracking stood guiltily, and moved before her. It was Llyfr'yn Darllenydd, ones of the sons of the charcoal burner Grym ng'Darllen. The inpudent fellow had already crept around her for some time. Draiochean decided to take the opportunity with a few of her claws, when she was blinded by a bright light that shone from the nearby clearing. She quickly ducked back into the thicket, and motioned for Llyfr to do likewise.''

::''In the clearning, the elves had assembled and formed a circle around an unnaturally blazing fire. Draiochean heard quiet singer, which souned to her ears like the rushing of the wind amongst the leaves of an ancient forest.''

::''The singing becamse louder, and the elves in the glade began to dance. Very slowly, very composed, and then a little bit faster. Suddenly the dancing stopped, and the singing fell silent. The magician called out arcane words to teh forest. Draiochean and Llyfr's hearts beat faster, and he timidly seized her hand, when something ancient and large picked them both up, and raised the two of them into the air...''

== Draig ==

::''"Thus you know, manling, that your time has already expired before they come. The forces of the Draig gather themselves at the boundries of order. They will shatter you, as we have shattered your swords and spears. They will sweep you from the face of the earth like the evening wind blowing dust from the petals of a desert flower. The Draig are power, and power is the Draig... I see you doubt? You think you can conquer the Draig? Presumptuous manling, you will never restrain the Draig, because the length of one hundred lifetimes is nothing. You want to be be a servant of the Draig? Know then that the Draig need no servants, because the Draig were at the beginning, and they will be at the end."''

Prophecy of Igjarjuk, oldest one of the Wyrms, on its death bed after the battle of Melvaunt, to Casandra, clan of the death falcons

