Here you find short descriptions of all skills that a unit can learn in the the world of Eressea. For detailed information about how to learn and utilise skills, see the [[skills.html|skills chapter]].

; <span id="Alchemy"></span>Alchemy
: For producing potions from herbs. Learning this skill requires 200 pieces of silver per turn.
; <span id="Armoursmithing"></span>Armoursmithing
: For making armour from iron or laen.
; <span id="Bow"></span>Bow
: For utilising bows and for [[#taxation|taxation]].
; Cartmaking
: For making carts and catapults from wood.
; Catapult
: For utilising catapults. Cannot be used for [[#taxation|taxation]].
; Crossbow
: For utilising crossbows and for [[#taxation|taxation]].
; Endurance
: Makes a unit more resistant to physical damage in combat or due to lack of food.
; Entertainment
: For earning silver by entertaining peasants.
; Espionage
: For spying on other units to learn e.g. about their skills. Learning this skill requires 100 pieces of silver per turn.
; Forestry
: For making wood or mallorn from a region's trees.
; Herbalism
: For picking herbs to make potions, for growing herbs, and for planting seeds.
; Magic
: For casting magic spells. Learning this skill requires an [[magic.html#magiccosts|amount of silver]] that depends on the skill level.
; Masonry
: For making buildings from various resources.
; Melee
: For utilising swords, claymores, and axes and for [[#taxation|taxation]].
; Mining
: For making iron and laen from a region's natural resources.
; Perception
: For detecting hidden units or to prevent thievery.
; Polearm
: For utilising spears, lances, and halberds and for [[#taxation|taxation]].
; Quarrying
: For making stones from a region's natural resources.
; Riding
: For increasing a unit's movement speed and for beneficial combat modifiers.
; Roadwork
: For making roads from stones.
; Sailing
: For sailing ships on sea.
; Shipcraft
: For making ships from wood.
; Stealth
: For hiding from other units, stealing from them or eluding a siege.
; Tactics
: For gaining an additional round in combat by surprising the enemy. Learning this skills requires 200 pieces of silver per turn.
; Taming
: For taming horses to ride them.
; Taxation
: For earning silver by taxing peasants. Taxation also requires that a unit can master a weapon.
; Trade
: For earning silver by trading luxury items.
; Weaponsmithing
: For making weapons from wood, iron, mallorn or laen.

