On 9 December the format of the reports will change, and all tools will require an upgrade.

== What will be changed? ==

In the future, reports will be [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8 UTF-8] encoded. Until now, the encoding was done in [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO-8859-1#ISO-8859-1 ISO-8859-1]. The main advantage of the new encoding  is that it is now possible to use characters not in the Western alphabets, like those from Esperanto or Cyrillic.

== What clients are compatible? ==

* [[CSMapFX]] rev. 124
* [[Magellan]] Version 1.2.4 beta
* [[Text]] Version 1.6.2
* [[ECheck]] version 4.3.2-5

== I use a very old client! ==

Windows users can, for example [http://sourceforge.net/project/downloading.php?group_id=181990&use_mirror=switch&filename=CpConverter_v0.1.3.zip&32502743 Code Converter], and thus the encoding of the report (see Screenshot for proper settings) .

Linux users can simply report their iconv in the old format, they <tt> iconv-f utf8-t latin1 <meinreport.cr> neuer_report.cr </ dd>.

Mac users can possibly with [http://free.abracode.com/cyclone/ Cyclone] to start something.

== How do I as a programmer my client? ==

The simplest solution is in the code of the CR read a converter units at a constituent <tt> "UTF-8"; charset </ tt-> entry begins, the data received by a UTF-8-> ISO-8859 -1 converter. These can be either the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iconv iconv] library, or use one of a number Codeschnipseln ergooglen.

To test I [http://enno.homeunix.net/tmp/hse-reports.zip here] a ZIP file reports with the least HSE-Partie into the net.

== Do I have to send my commands little respect? ==

I have since been a number of tests to ensure that nothing should go wrong. However, if problems should arise with umlauts, please immediately [http://eressea.upb.de/mantis/ Bugreports].

== External links ==

* [Http://groups.google.com/group/eressea-client Eressea-Client mailing list]
* [Http://enno.homeunix.net/tmp/hse-reports.zip HSE-Reporte in UTF8]
* [Http://sourceforge.net/projects/cp-converter/ Code Converter]

[[Category:Software]]
